it's just gone 10:15 GMT I'm Laura Kyle
and we've been watching proceedings at
the un's top Court in the hag the
international court of justice though
we've been hearing Nicaragua's case
against Germany that Germany's support
for Israel violates the Gen genocide
convention Nicaragua told the court it's
extremely urgent that Germany halts arms
to Israel let's bring in our
correspondent SE vasson she joins us now
live from the hag se you were listening
in you were in the court from most of
those proceedings we heard twice from
the Nicaraguan Ambassador and from two
other representatives in this case so
far talk us through the proceedings
today well these past two hours must
have been very uncomfortable for Germany
80 years after the Holocaust the country
is now in the dock uh for facilitating
genocide the Nicaraguan legal team
called it a Judicial drama because this
is an except unprecedented case two
countries are here at the highest court
who are not directly involved in the war
in Gaza but they both are signaries to
the genocide convention and that's why
Nicaragua argues that Germany has its
own obligation to fulfill this
convention and not facilitate genocide
and it has also uh to do everything it
can to stop a possible genocide the
ambassador of Nicaragua here in the
Netherlands Carlos Gomez had very strong
words because Germany has been saying
from the beginning that Israel has a
right to self-defense he said clearly
Germany doesn't see the difference
between self-defense and genocide that
were very harsh words and he also uh
argued that
this that Germany is always referring to
that its own existence because of the
Holocaust is so much connected uh to
Israel is is kind of misleading uh
according to the Ambassador because he
said don't confuse Israel with Jews uh
and he also says that there is not only
this moral and and and feeling of guilt
that Germany is expressing but there's
also a business aspect to it because uh
the arm sales by German weapon companies
have gone through the roof in the last
year and he said it's not only uh
Germany business as usual because they
know what is happening in Israel and in
Gaza they know and they have now also
admitting in the last couple of months
that they're very concerned about the
possible breaches of international law
but they still sending weapons Germany
is the second largest uh exporter of
weapons to Israel after the United
States so this is what the ambassad had
to
say if the actions of Israel continue
unrestrained as they have since its
birth as a state and they continue to
receive the indiscriminate support of
States like Germany then a new
generation of Palestinian will rise up
again in the near future and we will
hear a future Secretary General
commenting this did not happen in a
pakum the case before the court is an
opportunity to break this vicious cycle
without support of States like Germany
Israel would not feel like can act with
total impunity Nicaragua is hopeful that
states particularly with the history of
Germany will he heed the decisions of
this
court so that we heard there from
Nicaragua for around two hours today
tell us what we're expecting tomorrow
and indeed when we might expect a
ruling well tomorrow it's Germany's uh
chance to defend itself and Nicaragua's
legal team has already been anticipating
on a few aspects and one of them is the
jurisdiction of the international court
of justice to to rule on this case
because of course Germany is not
directly uh bombing uh uh people in in
Gaza and it's also has no soldiers on
the ground there so there is no direct
link to this possible genocide but
according uh to the legal team by
Nicaragua uh there is definitely this
obligation that Germany has uh to abide
by this genocide convention so we expect
to hear the German team tomorrow it's
led by the highest legal advisor to the
foreign Ministry and a team from the UK
and Italy who will present their case
here uh and then we will expect a
provisional measure or decision on
provisional measures coming from the the
court here in a couple of weeks okay
step basson from outside the ha many
thanks for bringing us that update on
everything that has been going on there
this morning let's take a look closer
look now at Nicaragua's plea at the
international court of justice such
measures are binding but might not be
enforced by individual countries Germany
is one of Israel's closest allies and
its biggest weapon supplier after the us
German arms make up 30% of Israel's
Imports that's according to the
Stockholm International Peace Research
Institute the country has increased
weapons deliveries nearly tfold in 2023
delivering $354 Million worth last
year let's bring in now Raymond Murphy
he's a human rights lawyer and professor
of law at the University of gway and he
joins us now from gway in Ireland great
to have you with us we just heard from
our correspondent in the ha that this is
an exceptional and unprecedented case
but how strong is Nicaragua's
argument um yeah there there this is a
very important case and it seeks to
clarify certain legal issues um I I
think it has made a strong case in
respect of certain of the provisional
measures uh that it is seeking but I'm
not certain that other other measures it
has claimed uh that the court should
award uh will be successful and at the
heart of this case there are two legal
issues and I won't be I won't be over
technical the first is what exactly does
it mean uh the obligation uh to to
prevent and to punish uh the crime of
genocide and what exactly are the
obligations that follow from the Geneva
conventions and common article one which
requires all states uh to respect and
ensure respect for international human
Ian law and they are the two primary
legal foundations on which this case is
made and it has great relevance not just
for Gaza but also for all states that
manufacture weapons and Supply States
and other parties with weapons that are
ultimately used uh to commit violations
of international law human rights law uh
violations of the the uh convention
against uh genocide and a whole host of
other International measures that seek
to protect civilians and other
vulnerable groups um I think it also uh
Nicaragua did address one of the central
weaknesses in their own case and uh and
that's a technical concept known as the
indispensable third party issue Israel
is not a party to this particular case
but it is Central to the arguments being
made in other words there's an
accusation that Israel is committing
violations of international humanitarian
law and committing genocide in in in
Gaza and usually they would have to be a
party to the case before this could
proceed but as was rightly pointed out I
think by the representatives for
Nicaragua we can't wait to prove that
genocide is occurring we're all on
public notice and all states are on
public notice and that there are serious
violations of international humanitarian
law and the international court of
justice has already established that
there is a plausible uh case to be made
to protect the civilians of of um of
Gaza from genocide so there is a lot of
Merit in the case there are a lot of
political and legal implications for
this case and the what does surprise me
is unlike the case taken by South Africa
how little public attention and uh
International media attention has been
given to this case because because I
jump in there R much of what the court
is covering today I mean it's Uncharted
Territory isn't it so this is a case
that really could strengthen
international
law it is and and for that we all DET a
gratitude to Nicaragua um I mean uh I if
we get clarification on exactly what it
means uh what what are the state's
obligations all states obligations to
prevent the crime of genocide and what
are the what are the legal um
implications for for Germany and other
states that are providing weapons to
Israel now that they are aware that
there's a plausible case for genocide
and that there's overwhelming evidence
of a range of serious violations of
international humanitarian law um and uh
viewers might wonder why did it not take
the case against the United States seen
as the United States as the primary
supplier of weapons to Israel the reason
is simple in that is uh United States
has opted out of the relevant Clause
within the statute of the international
court of justice and and the uh also the
genocide convention that would allow
such a case to be taken against it
whereas Germany has not done so okay
Raymond Murphy many thanks indeed for
bringing your expertise as we uh open
that first day of the case against
Germany B by Nicaragua to the
international court of
justice